Data_Science/StudentPerformanceVisualisation/README.md, before:

# Data Visualisation with Python

A comprehensive project demonstrating advanced data visualisation techniques using Python libraries for educational data analysis.

## 📊 Goal

This repository contains Jupyter notebooks that demonstrate data analysis and visualisation techniques using Python. The project focuses on analyzing educational data (student performance) to extract meaningful insights through various visualisation methods, from basic plots to advanced statistical visualisations.

## 🛠️ Technologies Used

- **Python 3.x** - Core programming language
- **Matplotlib** - Fundamental plotting library for creating static visualisations
- **Seaborn** - Statistical data visualisation library built on Matplotlib
- **Pandas** - Data manipulation and analysis library
- **NumPy** - Numerical computing library for handling arrays and mathematical operations
- **Jupyter Notebook** - Interactive computing environment for creating and sharing documents
- **SQL** (via Pandas) - For data querying and analysis in some notebooks

## 📁 Repository Structure

```
PyVerse/Data_Science/StudentPerformanceVisualisation/
├── Visualisation.ipynb - Jupyter notebook with data analysis and visualisations
├── Viz_usingSQL.ipynb - Additional Jupyter notebook with data exploration
└── README.md - Project documentation
```

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.x
- pip package manager
- Jupyter Notebook

### Installation

1. **Clone the repository:**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/<org>/PyVerse.git
   cd PyVerse/Data_Science/StudentPerformanceVisualisation
   ```

2. **Create a virtual environment (recommended):**
   ```bash
   python -m venv dataviz_env
   source dataviz_env/bin/activate  # On Windows: dataviz_env\Scripts\activate
   ```

3. **Install required packages:**
   ```bash
   pip install jupyter pandas numpy matplotlib seaborn
   ```

4. **Launch Jupyter Notebook:**
   ```bash
   jupyter notebook
   ```

### Quick Start

1. Open `Visualisation.ipynb` in Jupyter Notebook
2. Run the cells to see the data analysis and visualisations in action
3. The notebook analyzes student performance data and creates visualisations to identify patterns

## 📚 What You'll Learn

### Data Analysis Skills
- Loading and exploring educational datasets
- Data cleaning and preprocessing techniques
- Creating derived metrics from raw data
- Grouping and aggregating data for analysis

### Visualisation Techniques
- Creating bar charts to compare categorical data
- Using statistical visualisations to understand data distributions
- Visualising relationships between variables
- Customizing plots with proper titles, labels, and styling

### Educational Data Analysis
- Analyzing student performance across different demographics
- Identifying factors that influence academic performance
- Comparing test scores across different groups
- Drawing insights from educational data

## 🎯 Featured Examples

### 1. Student Performance Analysis
Analysis of student test scores across different demographics, including math, reading, and writing scores.

### 2. Lunch Type Impact on Academic Performance
Visualisation showing how different lunch types (standard vs. free/reduced) correlate with academic performance.

### 3. Ethnicity Group Performance Comparison
Comparison of academic performance across different ethnicity groups to identify patterns and disparities.

### 4. Top Performers Analysis
Examination of characteristics and patterns among the top-performing students in the dataset.

## 🔧 Usage Examples

### Loading and Exploring Data
```python
import pandas as pd

# Load the student performance dataset
df = pd.read_csv("StudentsPerformance.csv")

# Display the first few rows
df.head()
```

### Creating a Bar Chart with Seaborn
```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import seaborn as sns

# Group by lunch type and compare average scores
lunch_comparison = df.groupby('lunch')[['math score', 'reading score', 'writing score']].mean()

# Create a bar plot
plt.figure(figsize=(8, 6))
sns.barplot(x=lunch_comparison.index, y=lunch_comparison['math score'])
plt.title('Math Scores by Lunch Type')
plt.ylabel('Average Math Score')
plt.show()
```

## 📊 Sample Visualisations

Here are some examples of visualisations demonstrated in the notebooks:

- **Bar Charts**: Compare performance metrics across different categories
- **Group Comparisons**: Analyze how different groups perform on various metrics
- **Statistical Summaries**: Understand the distribution and central tendencies of scores
- **Aggregated Data Visualizations**: View summarized data to identify patterns
- **Performance Analysis**: Visualise factors that influence academic performance

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions to improve and expand this project are welcome! Here's how you can help:

1. **Fork the repository**
2. **Create a feature branch:** `git checkout -b feature/new-visualisation`
3. **Add your own analysis or visualisation examples**
4. **Include clear documentation and comments**
5. **Test your code thoroughly**
6. **Submit a pull request**

### Contribution Guidelines
- Follow PEP 8 style guidelines for Python code
- Include descriptive markdown cells explaining your analysis
- Add meaningful comments to your code
- Use clear and informative visualisation titles and labels
- If using additional packages, document them in your notebook

## 📋 Requirements

The following Python packages are used in this project:

```
pandas
numpy
matplotlib
seaborn
jupyter
```

You can install these packages using pip:

```bash
pip install pandas numpy matplotlib seaborn jupyter
```

## 📖 Learning Resources

### Recommended Reading
- [Pandas Documentation](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/)
- [Matplotlib Documentation](https://matplotlib.org/stable/)
- [Seaborn Tutorial](https://seaborn.pydata.org/tutorial.html)
- [Python for Data Analysis](https://wesmckinney.com/book/) by Wes McKinney
- [Python Graph Gallery](https://python-graph-gallery.com/)

### Online Courses
- [Data Visualisation with Python](https://www.coursera.org/learn/python-for-data-visualization) (Coursera)
- [Data Visualization with Matplotlib and Seaborn](https://www.datacamp.com/courses/introduction-to-data-visualization-with-seaborn) (DataCamp)
- [Python for Data Science and Machine Learning](https://www.udemy.com/course/python-for-data-science-and-machine-learning-bootcamp/) (Udemy)

## 🆘 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**Issue**: Plots not displaying in Jupyter Notebook
```bash
pip install ipywidgets
jupyter nbextension enable --py widgetsnbextension
```

**Issue**: ImportError for visualization libraries
```bash
pip install --upgrade matplotlib seaborn pandas numpy
```

**Issue**: Dataset not found
- Make sure the StudentsPerformance.csv file is in the same directory as your notebook
- You can download the dataset from [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/spscientist/students-performance-in-exams)

**Issue**: Memory issues with large dataframes
- Use data sampling for initial exploration
- Apply filters to work with relevant subsets of data
- Use efficient aggregation methods before visualization

## 📞 Support

If you encounter any issues or have questions:

1. Check the [Issues](https://github.com/<org>/PyVerse/issues) page
2. Search existing discussions
3. Create a new issue with a detailed description
4. Include error messages and your environment information

## 📄 License

This project is available for educational and personal use.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- Thanks to the open-source community for the amazing data analysis and visualisation libraries
- The dataset used in this project is from [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/spscientist/students-performance-in-exams)
- Inspiration from educational data analysis projects and tutorials

## 📈 Roadmap

Future additions planned:
- [ ] Add more advanced visualisation examples
- [ ] Include additional datasets for diverse analysis
- [ ] Create a comprehensive data preprocessing guide
- [ ] Add correlation analysis between different factors
- [ ] Implement interactive visualisation examples

---

⭐ **Star this repository** if you find it helpful!

📧 **Contact**: bhanavee123@gmail.com for questions or collaboration opportunities

Commit message:

Email and Linked In Added in readme

Data_Science/StudentPerformanceVisualisation/README.md, after:

# Data Visualisation with Python

A comprehensive project demonstrating advanced data visualisation techniques using Python libraries for educational data analysis.

## 📊 Goal

This repository contains Jupyter notebooks that demonstrate data analysis and visualisation techniques using Python. The project focuses on analyzing educational data (student performance) to extract meaningful insights through various visualisation methods, from basic plots to advanced statistical visualisations.

## 🛠️ Technologies Used

- **Python 3.x** - Core programming language
- **Matplotlib** - Fundamental plotting library for creating static visualisations
- **Seaborn** - Statistical data visualisation library built on Matplotlib
- **Pandas** - Data manipulation and analysis library
- **NumPy** - Numerical computing library for handling arrays and mathematical operations
- **Jupyter Notebook** - Interactive computing environment for creating and sharing documents
- **SQL** (via Pandas) - For data querying and analysis in some notebooks

## 📁 Repository Structure

```
PyVerse/Data_Science/StudentPerformanceVisualisation/
├── Visualisation.ipynb - Jupyter notebook with data analysis and visualisations
├── Viz_usingSQL.ipynb - Additional Jupyter notebook with data exploration
└── README.md - Project documentation
```

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.x
- pip package manager
- Jupyter Notebook

### Installation

1. **Clone the repository:**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/<org>/PyVerse.git
   cd PyVerse/Data_Science/StudentPerformanceVisualisation
   ```

2. **Create a virtual environment (recommended):**
   ```bash
   python -m venv dataviz_env
   source dataviz_env/bin/activate  # On Windows: dataviz_env\Scripts\activate
   ```

3. **Install required packages:**
   ```bash
   pip install jupyter pandas numpy matplotlib seaborn
   ```

4. **Launch Jupyter Notebook:**
   ```bash
   jupyter notebook
   ```

### Quick Start

1. Open `Visualisation.ipynb` in Jupyter Notebook
2. Run the cells to see the data analysis and visualisations in action
3. The notebook analyzes student performance data and creates visualisations to identify patterns

## 📚 What You'll Learn

### Data Analysis Skills
- Loading and exploring educational datasets
- Data cleaning and preprocessing techniques
- Creating derived metrics from raw data
- Grouping and aggregating data for analysis

### Visualisation Techniques
- Creating bar charts to compare categorical data
- Using statistical visualisations to understand data distributions
- Visualising relationships between variables
- Customizing plots with proper titles, labels, and styling

### Educational Data Analysis
- Analyzing student performance across different demographics
- Identifying factors that influence academic performance
- Comparing test scores across different groups
- Drawing insights from educational data

## 🎯 Featured Examples

### 1. Student Performance Analysis
Analysis of student test scores across different demographics, including math, reading, and writing scores.

### 2. Lunch Type Impact on Academic Performance
Visualisation showing how different lunch types (standard vs. free/reduced) correlate with academic performance.

### 3. Ethnicity Group Performance Comparison
Comparison of academic performance across different ethnicity groups to identify patterns and disparities.

### 4. Top Performers Analysis
Examination of characteristics and patterns among the top-performing students in the dataset.

## 🔧 Usage Examples

### Loading and Exploring Data
```python
import pandas as pd

# Load the student performance dataset
df = pd.read_csv("StudentsPerformance.csv")

# Display the first few rows
df.head()
```

### Creating a Bar Chart with Seaborn
```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import seaborn as sns

# Group by lunch type and compare average scores
lunch_comparison = df.groupby('lunch')[['math score', 'reading score', 'writing score']].mean()

# Create a bar plot
plt.figure(figsize=(8, 6))
sns.barplot(x=lunch_comparison.index, y=lunch_comparison['math score'])
plt.title('Math Scores by Lunch Type')
plt.ylabel('Average Math Score')
plt.show()
```

## 📊 Sample Visualisations

Here are some examples of visualisations demonstrated in the notebooks:

- **Bar Charts**: Compare performance metrics across different categories
- **Group Comparisons**: Analyze how different groups perform on various metrics
- **Statistical Summaries**: Understand the distribution and central tendencies of scores
- **Aggregated Data Visualisations**: View summarized data to identify patterns
- **Performance Analysis**: Visualise factors that influence academic performance

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions to improve and expand this project are welcome! Here's how you can help:

1. **Fork the repository**
2. **Create a feature branch:** `git checkout -b feature/new-visualisation`
3. **Add your own analysis or visualisation examples**
4. **Include clear documentation and comments**
5. **Test your code thoroughly**
6. **Submit a pull request**

### Contribution Guidelines
- Follow PEP 8 style guidelines for Python code
- Include descriptive markdown cells explaining your analysis
- Add meaningful comments to your code
- Use clear and informative visualisation titles and labels
- If using additional packages, document them in your notebook

## 📋 Requirements

The following Python packages are used in this project:

```
pandas
numpy
matplotlib
seaborn
jupyter
```

You can install these packages using pip:

```bash
pip install pandas numpy matplotlib seaborn jupyter
```

## 📖 Learning Resources

### Recommended Reading
- [Pandas Documentation](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/)
- [Matplotlib Documentation](https://matplotlib.org/stable/)
- [Seaborn Tutorial](https://seaborn.pydata.org/tutorial.html)
- [Python for Data Analysis](https://wesmckinney.com/book/) by Wes McKinney
- [Python Graph Gallery](https://python-graph-gallery.com/)

### Online Courses
- [Data Visualisation with Python](https://www.coursera.org/learn/python-for-data-visualization) (Coursera)
- [Data Visualization with Matplotlib and Seaborn](https://www.datacamp.com/courses/introduction-to-data-visualization-with-seaborn) (DataCamp)
- [Python for Data Science and Machine Learning](https://www.udemy.com/course/python-for-data-science-and-machine-learning-bootcamp/) (Udemy)

## 🆘 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**Issue**: Plots not displaying in Jupyter Notebook
```bash
pip install ipywidgets
jupyter nbextension enable --py widgetsnbextension
```

**Issue**: ImportError for visualisation libraries
```bash
pip install --upgrade matplotlib seaborn pandas numpy
```

**Issue**: Dataset not found
- Make sure the StudentsPerformance.csv file is in the same directory as your notebook
- You can download the dataset from [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/spscientist/students-performance-in-exams)

**Issue**: Memory issues with large dataframes
- Use data sampling for initial exploration
- Apply filters to work with relevant subsets of data
- Use efficient aggregation methods before visualisation

## 📞 Support

If you encounter any issues or have questions:

1. Check the [Issues](https://github.com/<org>/PyVerse/issues) page
2. Search existing discussions
3. Create a new issue with a detailed description
4. Include error messages and your environment information

## 📄 License

This project is available for educational and personal use.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- Thanks to the open-source community for the amazing data analysis and visualisation libraries
- The dataset used in this project is from [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/spscientist/students-performance-in-exams)
- Inspiration from educational data analysis projects and tutorials

## 📈 Roadmap

Future additions planned:
- [ ] Add more advanced visualisation examples
- [ ] Include additional datasets for diverse analysis
- [ ] Create a comprehensive data preprocessing guide
- [ ] Add correlation analysis between different factors
- [ ] Implement interactive visualisation examples

---

⭐ **Star this repository** if you find it helpful!

📧 **Contact**: [bhanavee123@gmail.com](mailto:bhanavee123@gmail.com)  or [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/bhaanavee-c-s-/) for questions or collaboration opportunities
